KEP-4026: Add new annotation for job creation timestamp (#4027)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/4026-job-creation-timestamp-annotation/README.md

## Design Details

The CronJob controller will only need a minor update to the [getJobFromTemplate2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7024beeeeb1f2e4cde93805a137cd7ad92fec466/pkg/controller/cronjob/utils.go#L188) function, to add the job scheduled timestamp as the job annotation `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp`. The scheduled timestamp is represented in `RFC3339`.

For the scheduled timestamp's timezone, the initial thought was to use `UTC` as it's used as the primary one for less confusion. However, since the `job` object has a `spec.timeZone`, it was a better to use the same timezone within the same object. If the job `spec.timeZone` is not set or `nil`, the annotation will use the `UTC` timezone as a default.

### Test Plan

- [X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/controller/cronjob`: `05/22/2023` - `96.2%`

##### Integration tests

> Unit tests will ensure the new annotation is correctly added to jobs, and integration tests will verify that the annotation is only added to jobs from newly created CronJobs, not existing workloads.

Reviewer: for newly created Jobs for any CronJobs, right?

[i.e. we create it for jobs created from both newly added and already existing CronJobs, just don't touch already existing jobs, right?]

Reviewer 2: I missed this, in the risks and mitigations section we explicitly pointed out that `inject the annotation for newly created Jobs from CronJobs for when the feature is on` so this test should ensure the annotation is present when the feature is on and missing when off.

Author: Updated.

##### e2e tests

E2E tests will not provide any additional coverage that isn't already covered by unit + integration tests, since we are simply adding an annotation, so no e2e tests will be necessary for this change.

### Graduation Criteria

> The feature will be released directly in Beta state since there is no benefit in having an alpha release, since we are simply adding a new annotation so there is very little risk (unlike removing an

Reviewer: Please remove the "(unlike removing an..." part - depending on the details some annotations can't even be realistically removed, so let's not introduce confusion.

existing annotation which other things may depend on, for example).

#### Beta

- Feature implemented behind the `CronJobsScheduledAnnotation` feature gate.
- Unit and integration tests passing.

#### GA

Fix any potentially reported bugs.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

No changes required to existing cluster to use this feature.

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A. This feature doesn't require coordination between control plane components,
the changes to each controller are self-contained.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: JobScheduledAnnotation

>   - Components depending on the feature gate:

Reviewer: please fill in

- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

> No.

Reviewer: Actually it does - the job will now contain annotation and it didn't before.

Author: Updated.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes. If the feature gate is disabled, the CronJob controller will not add the
scheduled timestamp as an annotation.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The CronJob controller will begin adding the scheduled timestamp as an annotation to jobs created while the feature is enabled, and existing jobs will be unaffected.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

We plan to add unit tests.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

> It will not impact already running workloads.

Reviewer: How can a rollout fail?

Author: Updated.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

- Users can monitor queue related metrics (e.g., queue depth and work duration) to make sure they aren't growing.

> - For CronJobs, users can also monitor `job_creation_skew_duration_seconds`.

Reviewer: This change only really affects CronJob, so the above point I'm assuming is also for cronjob controller.
Can you please make that specific? And provide the exact list of metrics?

Author: Updated. Also updated the metrics list as per @soltysh [comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4027#discussion_r1217748647).

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> The feature will be tested manually prior to beta launch.

Reviewer: Please ensure that this is done (and the KEP is updated with the test description and findings - you can take a look at example e.g. https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3658 ) before the PR that is switching enabling the FG by default is submitted to k/k.

@soltysh - I guess you will be approving the k/k change, so can you please ensure that?

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

> N/A

Reviewer: That's almost never true - please remove

Reviewer: I only meant "N/A", not the section title :)

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

> - Check if CronJobs have the annotation `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp`.

Reviewer: That's not something I can really do if e.g. I'm managing 10,000 clusters.

I'm wondering if we should consider exposing a metric, but maybe that would be an overkill..
@soltysh - thoughts?

Reviewer 2: In normal cases I'd agree that metric is required, but for this particular case, I think randomly checking that value is sufficient. For monitoring purposes I'd strictly rely on pre-existing metrics which monitor both the cronjob queue and the job creation skew, which should provide sufficient signal if the controller is working as expected.

Author: Updated.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason:
- [X] API .metadata
  - Condition name:
  - Other field:
    - `.metadata.annotations['batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp']`
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

- 99% percentile over day for Job syncs is <= 15s for a client-side 50 QPS limit.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [X] Metrics
  - Metric name:
  - `job_creation_skew_duration_seconds`.
  - [Optional] Aggregation method:

>   - Components exposing the metric:

Reviewer: please fill in

- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

> ###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

Reviewer: Please answer

### Dependencies

> ###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

Reviewer: please answer

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

> New job annotation of size 34B plus value of size N where N is the number of digits in the job ordinal.

Reviewer: How is "job ordinal" related here?

Author: typo. fixed.

Worst case for N would be the max number of jobs per node * max number of nodes.

> Per the docs on [large clusters](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/best-practices/cluster-large/), this would be 110 pods/node * 5000 nodes = 550,000 (6 digits).

Reviewer: FWIW - we support 150,000 pods:
https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md

But I have no idea how this is related...

Author: Removed unneeded statement.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Currently, there is no supported way to get the original/expected initial scheduled timestamp for the job. This KEP proposes to set the the original scheduled time, `CreationTimestamp`, as an annotation in the job metadata.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Set job creation timestamp as an annotation on the job.
- Adding the annotation should not be disruptive to existing workloads.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

At a high level, the proposal is to modify the CronJob controller to set the job creation timestamp as a job annotation. The details of this are outlined in the Design Details section below.

> Job creation timestamp annotation: `batch.kubernetes.io/job-creation-timestamp`

Reviewer 3: I find this confusing.
This feature is mostly about a job created by a CronJob. And `creation-timestamp` conflicts with the .metadata.creationTimestamp field.

Maybe `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp`?

Author: I agree with the confusion, but also, `scheduled-timestamp` can be confusing. I thought to have it as `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-original-scheduled-timestamp` but not sure if this is too long, wdyt?

Author: Addressed.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a user, I would like to get the job's creation timestamp that this job was expected to be running.

> #### Story 2

Author: Updated.

1. Inject the annotation on *all jobs* (jobs existing prior to feature enablement and jobs created after feature enablement). However, retroactively modifying jobs of existing workloads would risk being too disruptive to existing workloads which may have logic depending on job annotations, so this option should not be considered.

Both options 1 and 2 will not be disruptive to existing workloads. Option 1 is more straightforward and does not risk locking us into adding this somewhat
hacky annotation to Jobs indefinitely like Option 2 does. On the other hand, outside of the cluster downgrade edge case, Option 2 will
ensure consistency within a single CronJob and therefore a more predictable user experience.

After considering these trade-offs, we propose to move forward with Option 1 for simplicity and to avoid being stuck adding this annotation to Jobs. In addition, the downside of existing workloads having only a subset of jobs with the new annotation will not cause any serious issues.

## Design Details

> The CronJob controller will only need a minor update to the [getJobFromTemplate2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/cronjob/utils.go#L188) function, to add the job creation timestamp as the job annotation `batch.kubernetes.io/job-creation-timestamp`. The creation timestamp is represented in `RFC3339` form and is in `UTC`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The CronJob controller will only need a minor update to the [getJobFromTemplate2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/6f2cd1b5bd76e336c08846281db1aacca1e7dd13/pkg/controller/cronjob/utils.go#L188) function, to add the job creation timestamp as the job annotation `batch.kubernetes.io/job-creation-timestamp`. The creation timestamp is represented in `RFC3339` form and is in `UTC`.
```

I saw in another KEP this recommendation to not include code links from master as those don't age well.

Author: Updated.

New job annotation of size 34B plus value of size N where N is the number of digits in the job ordinal.
Worst case for N would be the max number of jobs per node * max number of nodes.
Per the docs on [large clusters](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/best-practices/cluster-large/), this would be 110 pods/node * 5000 nodes = 550,000 (6 digits).

Hence, max annotation size would be 34 + 6 = 40B.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

No.

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?

No.

### Troubleshooting

N/A

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

N/A

###### What are other known failure modes?

N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

- 2023-05-22: KEP published

## Implementation History

## Drawbacks

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 4: A few questions I have (mostly as a budding k8 dev):

1) Why not add this as a label instead?

2) Why not add this as a status field?  Job has a StartTime status field

Author: Added to the alternatives.

Reviewer 4: Okay!  Thank you for clearing that up.

  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [X] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Currently, there is no supported way to get the original/expected initial scheduled timestamp for the job. This KEP proposes to set the the original scheduled time, `CreationTimestamp`, as an annotation in the job metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, there is no supported way to get the original/expected initial scheduled timestamp for the job created from a cronjob. This KEP proposes to set the the original scheduled time  as an annotation in the job metadata.
```

Reviewer 2: 1. we need to explicitly say it's only for those created by cronjob controller
2. we want the schedule time, not the creationtimestamp

## Motivation

### Goals

> - Set job creation timestamp as an annotation on the job.

Reviewer 2: schedule time, not the creation timestamp, the latter is already available.

1. Only inject the job annotation for *newly created CronJobs*. We can track this by annotating newly created CronJobs to distinguish existing ones from newly created ones.
Using this strategy, either none of the jobs have this annotation, or all of them do, which will provide a more consistent user experience. However, in the case of a cluster downgrade to a version without this feature, new jobs would start getting created without this annotation again.

1. Inject the annotation on *all jobs* (jobs existing prior to feature enablement and jobs created after feature enablement). However, retroactively modifying jobs of existing workloads would risk being too disruptive to existing workloads which may have logic depending on job annotations, so this option should not be considered.

Both options 1 and 2 will not be disruptive to existing workloads. Option 1 is more straightforward and does not risk locking us into adding this somewhat
hacky annotation to Jobs indefinitely like Option 2 does. On the other hand, outside of the cluster downgrade edge case, Option 2 will
ensure consistency within a single CronJob and therefore a more predictable user experience.

> After considering these trade-offs, we propose to move forward with Option 1 for simplicity and to avoid being stuck adding this annotation to Jobs. In addition, the downside of existing workloads having only a subset of jobs with the new annotation will not cause any serious issues.

Reviewer: How exactly you will distinguish between "old cronjob" and "new cronjob"?
Isn't what you want effective an ability for the user to explicitly opt-in for the annotation addition?

Reviewer 3: I suppose the author meant new Jobs, not new CronJobs.

Reviewer 2: Yes, this definitely was about new job created from cronjob, @helayoty can you update the description?

## Design Details

> The CronJob controller will only need a minor update to the [getJobFromTemplate2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7024beeeeb1f2e4cde93805a137cd7ad92fec466/pkg/controller/cronjob/utils.go#L188) function, to add the job creation timestamp as the job annotation `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp`. The creation timestamp is represented in `RFC3339` form and is in `UTC`.

Reviewer 2: Hmmm... this is the bit I'm not sure, why would we pick UTC vs `.spec.timeZone`? Can you think of pros and cons of both approaches and write it down? That was one of the reasons I wanted to write this KEP :wink:

Author: I believe `spec.timeZone` makes more sense.

Author: Updated.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

We plan to add unit tests.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

It will not impact already running workloads.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

- Users can monitor queue related metrics (e.g., queue depth and work duration) to make sure they aren't growing.
- For CronJobs, users can also monitor `job_creation_skew_duration_seconds`.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

The feature will be tested manually prior to beta launch.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

N/A

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Check if CronJobs have the annotation `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp`.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason:

> - [X] API .status

Reviewer 4: Not sure if this is correct.  It would be in metadata and not in API status?

  - Condition name:
  - Other field:
    - `.metadata.annotations['batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp']`
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

- 99% percentile over day for Job syncs is <= 15s for a client-side 50 QPS limit.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

> - [ ] Metrics

Reviewer 2: You want to name the metric you used in the above section

Author: Updated.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Set job scheduled timestamp as an annotation on the job.
- Adding the annotation should not be disruptive to existing workloads.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

At a high level, the proposal is to modify the CronJob controller to set the job scheduled timestamp as a job annotation. The details of this are outlined in the Design Details section below.

Job scheduled timestamp annotation: `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp`

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a user, I would like to get the job's scheduled timestamp that this job was expected to be running.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

### Risks and Mitigations

One thing that must be considered is how enabling this new feature will interact with existing workloads. There are a couple of options:

1. Only inject the job annotation for *newly created CronJobs*. We can track this by annotating newly created CronJobs to distinguish existing ones from newly created ones.

> Using this strategy, either none of the jobs have this annotation, or all of them do, which will provide a more consistent user experience. However, in the case of a cluster downgrade to a version without this feature, new jobs would start getting created without this annotation again.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest keeping the idea simple, iow. to inject the annotation for newly created Jobs from CronJobs for when the feature is on. This will nicely play with downgrade and doesn't introduce unnecessary complexity. I don't think that the inconsistency (all jobs or none created from a cronjob) is that big of a deal. CronJobs are always working with the assumption that the changes apply only to newly created jobs after the change.

Author: Updated.

> 1. Inject the annotation on *all jobs* (jobs existing prior to feature enablement and jobs created after feature enablement). However, retroactively modifying jobs of existing workloads would risk being too disruptive to existing workloads which may have logic depending on job annotations, so this option should not be considered.

Reviewer 2: Like I said in the other comment, I don't think that option was ever on the table. CronJobs always operate on newly created Jobs, and this feature should be identical.

Both options 1 and 2 will not be disruptive to existing workloads. Option 1 is more straightforward and does not risk locking us into adding this somewhat
hacky annotation to jobs indefinitely like Option 2 does. On the other hand, outside of the cluster downgrade edge case, Option 2 will
ensure consistency within a single job and therefore a more predictable user experience.

After considering these trade-offs, we propose to move forward with Option 1 for simplicity and to avoid being stuck adding this annotation to jobs. In addition, the downside of existing workloads having only a subset of jobs with the new annotation will not cause any serious issues.

## Design Details

The CronJob controller will only need a minor update to the [getJobFromTemplate2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7024beeeeb1f2e4cde93805a137cd7ad92fec466/pkg/controller/cronjob/utils.go#L188) function, to add the job scheduled timestamp as the job annotation `batch.kubernetes.io/cronjob-scheduled-timestamp`. The scheduled timestamp is represented in `RFC3339`.

> For the scheduled timestamp's timezone, the initial thought was to use `UTC` as it's used as the primary one for less confusion. However, since the `job` object has a `spec.timeZone`, it was a better to use the same timezone within the same object. If the job `spec.timeZone` is not set or `nil`, the annotation will use the `UTC` timezone as a default.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

### Test Plan

- [X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/controller/cronjob`: `05/22/2023` - `96.2%`

##### Integration tests

Unit tests will ensure the new annotation is correctly added to jobs, and integration tests will verify that the annotation is only added to jobs from newly created CronJobs, not existing workloads.

##### e2e tests

E2E tests will not provide any additional coverage that isn't already covered by unit + integration tests, since we are simply adding an annotation, so no e2e tests will be necessary for this change.

### Graduation Criteria

The feature will be released directly in Beta state since there is no benefit in having an alpha release, since we are simply adding a new annotation so there is very little risk (unlike removing an
existing annotation which other things may depend on, for example).

#### Beta

> - Feature implemented behind the `JobsScheduledAnnotation` feature gate.

Reviewer 2: CronJobsScheduledAnnotation
